.TH USH.ICN 1 "25 September 2007" "version 0.2"
.CO \" Manual page for ush.icn(1)
.SH NAME
\fBush.icn\fR \- Preprocessor for \fBshell.icn( 1 )\fR.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.TP 4
Invoked from the command line:
.B ush
[-s ushpath]{0:N} [infile]{0:N}
.TP 4
Invoked from \fBshell.icn( 1 )\fR:
.B ush
[out_co-expresion]{1:1} [result_list]{1:1} [infile]{0:N}
.P
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ush.icn
is an example implementation of a preprocessor for 
.I ad hoc 
invocation of \fBshell.icn( 1 )\fR functionality "on the fly".
It is very incomplete.
.P
At this time,
.B ush.icn
supports only two functionalities:
.P
.TP 4
*
Type lines one at a time for input into shell.icn instead of 
reading them from a file.  This is not significantly different
from invoking shell.icn without a -i or -p argument.
.TP 4
*
"Sourcing a file as a shell.icn input script", i.e., reading
a shell.icn input script from a file and 
sending it to an instance of shell.icn.
.P
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Command Line Invocation
Zero or more input files may be specified at the end of the command
line.  A dash may be supplied in lieu of a file name to indicate that 
input should be taken from the standard input.
If none are specified, \fBush.icn\fR reads from the standard input.
.P 
The following switch may preceed the input files when  
\fBush.icn\fR is invoked:
.P
.TP 4
\fB\-s\fR \fIpath\fR
Search directory specified by \fIpath\fR for icode and script files.  
This option may be repeated; alternatively, several directories may
be specified by enclosing \fIpath\fR in double quotes and separating 
directory names with spaces (as is done for IPATH and LPATH).  
If a directory name contains a space, you must both enclose 
\fIpath\fR in double quotes and enclose space-containing directory names
in single quotes, (e.g., \-s "'/path to/one folder' ../another_folder" ).
Directories specified with the \-s option are searched
after the working directory and 
before directories specified by the \fIUSHPATH\fR environment variable.
.SS Invocation from Shell.icn( 1 ):
When invoked from \fBShell.icn( 1 )\fR, the first argument to
\fBush.icn\fR must be a co-expression (i.e., the instance of
\fBShell.icn( 1 )\fR) and the second argument must be a list.
If no third argument is specified, input is taken from the standard input
.SH "ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES"
.TP 4
.I USHPATH
Space\-separated directory names searched after those specified 
with the \-s option.  
Enclose spaces in directory names in single quotes.
\fIUSHPATH\fR must not contain double quotes.
.P
.SH EXAMPLES
Suppose that test.shell and translated versions of consumer.icn and producer.icn are in 
.nf 
  ./dist
.fi
and suppose that \fBush.icn\fR is invoked either directly with
.nf
  ush -s dist
.fi
or indirectly with
.nf
  shell -s dist -p ush
.fi
The input lines
.nf
  . test.shell
  CONS   := consumer PROD -
  PROD   := producer CONS
  @ PROD
.fi
invoke \fBshell.icn( 1 )\fR first with test.shell as the input script and then
with the next lines as a second script.
.P
Execution of the above input using \fBush.icn\fR 
should produce the same results as as 
executing the following input using \fBbash( 1 )\fR
.nf
  { cat test.shell ; cat << END
  CONS   := consumer PROD -
  PROD   := producer CONS
  @ PROD
  END
  } | shell
.fi
except 
.TP 4
*
you don't need bash
.TP 4
*
you can decide whether you want to type the remaining lines 
after you have seen the output that test.shell produces.
.SH PORTABILITY
.B ush.icn 
depends on 
.B shell.icn( 1 )
which depends on 
.B Stream.icn( 3 )
which in turn depends on classes.
Thus, ush.icn is compatible with Unicon but not Icon 
since Icon does not support classes.
ush.icn is not Idol-compatible because Stream.icn and shell.icn not Idol-compatible.

.SH SEE ALSO
Eschenlauer, Arthur C., 2006. "A Unicon Shell",
\fIThe Generator\fR, Vol. 2, No. 2, pp 3-32.
.nf
  http://www.unicon.org/generator/v2n2.pdf
.fi
.P
Jeffery, Clinton L., 1997. 
\fIThe MT Icon Interpreter.\fR 
(Icon Project Document 169).
.nf
  http://www.cs.arizona.edu/icon/docs/ipd169.htm
.fi
.P
\fBStream.icn( 3 )\fR, \fBshell.icn( 1 )\fR
.P
.SH BUGS AND LIMITATIONS
.P
Infinite loops in tasks will prevent control being returned to ush.icn
.P
If shell.icn aborts, ush.icn aborts instead of attempting to restart shell.icn.
.P
At present, the parser for scripts is an integral part of shell.icn. 
Thus, there is no way to specify alternative script syntax 
for lines typed into ush.icn.
.P
No protocol has yet been defined for the use of result lists.
.SH AUTHOR
Art Eschenlauer
.P
\fBush.icn\fR is in the public domain.  
The freedom of its content is protected by the Lesser GNU public license, version 2.1, February 1999,
.nf
  http://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl.html
.fi
which means you are granted permission to use this in any way that 
does not limit others' freedom to use it.

